[{"name": "Matt Vickers", "score": 8, "angle": "judicial independence, personal testimony", "why": "Vivid courtroom anecdote shows chaotic, unfair tribunal system in practice.", "passage": "I could go on forever, but just recently I accidentally sat in on the wrong hearing at a tribunal. I was only meant to be an observer; a younger member of my team was doing a hearing, and I thought I would like to observe it. I was sent the wrong link by the tribunal, and it took me about half an hour before I suddenly realised that I was on the wrong link—I thought this other matter was just being heard first, and mine was going to follow. I sat through half an hour, and it was a man from Iraq with no representation and no bundle. The interpreter did not really understand him, and it was a waste of time. It took about 30 minutes for the immigration judge to say, \u201cWe have to abandon this.\u201d"}, {"name": "Anna Turley", "score": 1, "angle": "government minister, pro-bill", "why": "Speaker defends the Bill, so it works against not for opposition campaign.", "passage": "This is about fairness; if people come here, we want them to integrate and to settle. If they have a genuine right to be here, we will always provide that, but we also have to be conscious that, in a country where our resources are not infinite, we have to have a managed system, where we remove those who have no right to be here and ensure that we support people in a way that is compliant with our international obligations, but does not go over and above them, which perhaps in the past we have done too much."}, {"name": "Mr Paul Foster", "score": 7, "angle": "coercion, ministerial power grab", "why": "Warns the real aim is to hand the Home Secretary control over tribunals.", "passage": "Surely that would be a much more effective and speedy way to address the backlog than creating a whole new body and system, with its own mechanisms and staffing requirements. Although the stated intention of creating this new body is to address the asylum backlog, in reality, as we can see from the terms of the Bill, the true intention is to give the Home Secretary much more control over the operation of the tribunal system than she currently has."}, {"name": "Blake Stephenson", "score": 4, "angle": "backlog statistics, process strain", "why": "Useful factual evidence of system strain but not framed against the Bill.", "passage": "On receipts, back in 2023 we had about 58,000 cases coming into the system. In 2025-26, that was up to 118,000. The outstanding caseload has risen in that same period from about 50,000 to 150,000 cases. The courts have tried to look at every available option and opportunity to improve productivity in the system."}, {"name": "Dr Zubir Ahmed", "score": 1, "angle": "government backbencher, pro-bill", "why": "Question invites minister to defend the Bill; no anti-bill content.", "passage": "Can you provide some reflection on why the measures in the Bill are necessary, and what impact it will have, not only on restoring trust and public confidence in the immigration and asylum system, but on social cohesion more widely?"}, {"name": "Joe Robertson", "score": 1, "angle": "critical question, pro-bill answer", "why": "Question is sceptical but the response defends the Bill at length.", "passage": "I get that the system we have is not good enough, but that does not mean that what you are proposing is. We have heard lots of evidence in this session that the problems lie not necessarily with the law, but with the way the Home Office deals with applications. Are you absolutely sure that this is the best Bill you can introduce?"}, {"name": "Ben Goldsborough", "score": 1, "angle": "modern slavery, pro-bill", "why": "Minister's answer defends the Bill's modern slavery provisions, not opposing.", "passage": "We are very concerned about the number of late claims—it feels deliberately used to thwart returns. As we heard, a third of the failed removals involved modern slavery referral. Three quarters of those were raised between 3 pm on the day before removal and 6 am."}, {"name": "Mr Jonathan Brash", "score": 8, "angle": "poor Home Office decisions", "why": "Sharp statistic showing most appeals succeed because of bad initial decisions.", "passage": "In the asylum system at the moment, 66% of cases are either accepted on appeal or they are withdrawn—the implication being that the Home Office had withdrawn that case. That is 66% of asylum appeals that could be effectively wiped out if the initial decision was better made. The fact that initial decisions by the Home Office are bad is a fact—you can look at the National Audit Office review of Home Office decision making or the Home Office\u2019s own assessment of the quality of its decisions."}]