2024 Bill 27 
First Session, 31st Legislature, 3 Charles III 
THE LEGISLA
TIVE ASSEMBLY OF ALBERTA 
BILL 27 
ED
UCATION AMENDMENT ACT, 2024 
THE MINISTER OF EDUCATION 
Firs
t Reading . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Second Reading . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Committee of the Whole . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Third Reading . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Royal Assent . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 1 
Bill 27 
 
BILL 27 
2024 
EDUCATION AMENDMENT ACT, 2024 
( A s s e n t e d  t o            ,  2 0 2 4 )  
HIS MAJESTY, by and with the advice and consent of the 
Legislative Assembly of Alberta, enacts as follows: 
Amends SA 2012 cE-0.3 
1   The Education Act is amended by this Act. 
 
2   The preamble is amended 
 (a) by adding the following  after the 4th recital: 
WHEREAS the education of children and students is 
important to Alberta’s prosperity and social well-being; 
 (b) by adding the following  after the 15th recital: 
WHEREAS the Government of Alberta is committed to 
ensuring strong learning opportunities regardless of 
whether those opportunities are in-person, online or in a 
home education program; 
WHEREAS the Government of Alberta recognizes that 
in-person learning opportunities are important for 
students’ well-being and success and is committed to 
preserving access to in-person learning; 
WHEREAS the Government of Alberta recognizes that 
students have a right to education; 
WHEREAS the Government of Alberta believes that 
in-person learning should be prioritized during an 
 
 1 Explanatory Notes  
Explanatory Notes 
1   Amends chapter E-0.3 of the Statutes of Alberta, 2012. 
2   The preamble presently reads in part: 
WHEREAS the role of education is to develop engaged thinkers who 
think critically and creatively and ethical citizens who demonstrate 
respect, teamwork and democratic ideals and who work with an 
entrepreneurial spirit to face challenges with resiliency, 
adaptability, risk-taking and bold decision-making; 
WHEREAS the Government of Alberta recognizes public schools, 
separate schools, Francophone schools, private schools, charter 
schools, early childhood services programs and home education 
programs as being valued and integral in providing choice in 
education to students and parents; 
  
 2 
emergency and that shifts from in-person learning to 
at-home learning should be strictly limited; 
 
3   Section 1(1) is amended by renumbering clause (a) as 
clause (a.1) and by adding the following before clause (a.1): 
 (a) “at-home learning” means teacher-directed education 
programming provided by a board, a Francophone regional 
authority, an operator of a charter school or a person 
responsible for the operation of a private school to a student 
on a temporary basis at the student’s residence or at a 
location other than the student’s regularly attended school;  
 
4   
The following is added after section 3: 
Right to education during emergencies 
3.1(1)  Every student has a right to education consistent with the 
requirements of the regulations during  
 (a) a public health emergency confirmed under section 
29(2.1) of the Public Health Act, 
 (b) a state of public health  emergency declared under 
section 52.1 of the Public Health Act,  
 (c) a local state of public h ealth emergency declared under 
section 52.2 of the Public Health Act, 
 (d) a state of emergency declared under section 18(1) of the 
Emergency Management Act,  
 (e) a state of local emergency  declared under section 21 of 
the Emergency Management Act, or  
 (f) an emergency prescribed in an order of the Minister 
under section 11.1(3). 
(2)  A board must provide in-person learning or at-home learning 
during an emergency described in subsection (1) in accordance 
with the regulations. 
 
 2 Explanatory Notes  
3   Adds definition. 
4   Right to education during emergencies; parental notification 
and consent during emergencies. 
  
 3 
Parental notification and consent during emergencies 
3.2(1)  Subject to subsection (2) and the regulations, if, during an 
emergency described in section 3.1(1), health measures 
established by a board that relate to the emergency are intended 
to apply to the body of a student, the board, before the intended 
health measures are applied to the body of the student, shall, 
 (a) in the case of a student who is under 16 years of age, 
seek the consent of the student’s parent, or 
 (b) in the case of a student wh o is 16 years of age or older, 
notify the student’s parent and seek the consent of the 
student or the parent.  
(2)  Subsection (1)  
 (a) applies to health measures prescribed by an order of the 
Minister under section 11.1(3)(b) in addition to those 
established by a board, and  
 (b) does not apply to  
 (i) routine health measures  such as hand washing, 
cleaning or hygiene, and  
 (ii) any other health measures exempted by an order of 
the Minister under section 11.1(3)(c). 
 
5   
The following is added after section 11: 
Regulations and orders 
11.1(1)  The Minister may make regulations 
 (a) respecting in-person learning and at-home learning; 
 (b) respecting notification and consent relating to health 
measures; 
 (c) respecting the wearing of face masks or other face 
coverings;
 
 3 Explanatory Notes  
 
5   Regulations and orders. 
  
 4 
 (d) respecting policies that a board must establish and 
implement respecting in-person learning or at-home 
learning; 
 (e) defining, for the purposes of this Part, any term used but  
not defined in this Part. 
(2)  A regulation made under this section may be general or 
specific in its application, including, without limitation, during an 
emergency. 
(3)  The Minister may, by order, do the following: 
 (a) prescribe emergencies for the purposes of section 
3.1(1)(f); 
 (b) prescribe, for the purposes of section 3.2(2)(a), health 
measures that relate to an emergency and are intended to 
apply to the body of a student; 
 (c) exempt, for the purposes of section 3.2(2)(b)(ii), health 
measures that relate to an emergency and are intended to 
apply to the body of a student. 
(4)  The Regulations Act does not apply to an order made under 
subsection (3). 
 
6   
Section 18(1) is amended by adding the following after 
clause (d): 
 (d.1) approve any learning and teaching resources referred to 
in section 18.1; 
 (d.2) approve any external party using or providing learning 
and teaching resources referred to in section 18.1; 
 
7   The following is added after section 18: 
Learning and teaching resources re gender identity,  
sexual orientation or human sexuality 
18.1(1)  In this section, 
 
 4 Explanatory Notes  
6   Adds to Ministerial authority.  
7   Learning and teaching resources re gender identity, sexual 
orientation or human sexuality. 
  
 5 
 (a) “external party” means a person or organization other 
than 
 (i) a board or an employee of a board,  
 (ii) a student, 
 (iii) a student organization es tablished under section 35.1, 
or 
 (iv) a staff liaison designa ted, or responsible adult 
appointed, under section 35.1; 
 (b) “learning and teaching re sources” means any resource 
used in a school to engage in learning or teaching, but 
does not include a resource 
 (i) created by a student, or 
 (ii) accessed by a student i ndependently, including 
through a school library. 
(2)  A board shall not use or permit the use or provision of 
learning and teaching resources that deal primarily and explicitly 
with gender identity, sexual orientation or human sexuality unless 
the learning and teaching resources are approved by the Minister. 
(3)  Where the use or provision of learning and teaching 
resources referred to in subsection (2) is by an external party, a 
board shall not permit that use or provision unless both the 
learning and teaching resources and external party are approved 
by the Minister. 
(4)  The Minister may establish approval criteria or requirements 
respecting learning and teaching resources and external parties 
for the purposes of this section. 
 
8   
Section 30(1) is amended  
 (a) by repealing clause (b) and substituting the following: 
 (b) in Part 1, sections 3, 3.1, 3 .2, 5, 6, 7, 9(2) and (4) and 
11.1;  
 
 5 Explanatory Notes  
8   Section 30(1) presently reads in part: 
30(1)  The following provisions and any regulations made under 
them apply to a registered or accredited private school and its 
operation, and a reference in those provisions or those regulations 
to a board or a trustee is deemed to include a reference to the 
 6 
 (b) in clause (c) by striking out “sections 16, 17, 18, 28.1, 29 
and 30” and substituting “sections 16, 17, 18, 18.1, 28.1, 
29 and 30”; 
 (c) in clause (d) by striking out “sections 31, 32 and 35.1” 
and substituting “sections 31, 32, 33.2 and 35.1”; 
 (d) in clause (e) by striking out “sections 56, 58.1, 58.2, 66 
and 70” and substituting “sections 56, 58.1, 58.11, 58.12, 
58.2, 66 and 70”. 
 
9   The following is added after section 33.1: 
Responsibilities re parental notification and consent 
for preferred name and pronouns 
33.2(1)  In this section, “new preferred name or pronouns” 
means a name or pronouns that 
 (a) vary from the name or pronouns that teachers, teacher 
leaders and other school staff have regularly used when 
referring to the student, and 
 (b) the student prefers for reasons related to the student’s 
gender identity. 
(2)  Subject to subsection (4), if a student requests that a new 
preferred name or pronouns be used by teachers, teacher leaders 
and other school staff when referring to the student in school, the 
board shall, 
 (a) in the case of a student who is under 16 years of age,  
 (i) notify the student’s parent of the request, and 
 (ii) seek the parent’s consent for teachers, teacher leaders 
and other school staff to use the new preferred name 
or pronouns when referring to the student in school,  
  o r  
 (b) in the case of a student who is 16 or 17 years of age, 
notify the student’s parent of the request. 
 
 6 Explanatory Notes  
person responsible for the operation of a private school or a 
member of the governing body of the operator of a private school, as 
the case may be: 
 (b) in Part 1, sections 3, 5, 6, 7 and 9(2) and (4); 
 (c) in Part 2, sections 16, 17, 18, 28.1, 29 and 30; 
 (d) in Part 3, sections 31,  32 and 35.1, section 42, except 
subsection (3), in respect of appeals referred to in section 
58.2, and Division 7; 
 (e) in Part 4, sections  56, 58.1, 58.2, 66 and 70; 
9   Responsibilities re parental notification and consent for 
preferred name and pronouns. 
  
 7 
(3)  A teacher, teacher leader or other school staff member shall 
not use a new preferred name or pronouns when referring to a 
student in school 
 (a) until the student’s parent is notified under subsection 
(2)(a)(i) or (b), and  
 (b) unless the parent’s consent is obtained under subsection 
(2)(a)(ii), if applicable. 
(4)  Where 
 (a) notifying the student’s parent or seeking the parent’s 
consent is reasonably expected to cause emotional or 
psychological harm to the student, or 
 (b) the student requests access to assistance,  
the board shall ensure that the student is provided with 
counselling or other assistance before notifying the student’s 
parent. 
(5)  No action lies against any of the following for anything done 
or omitted to be done in good faith when acting or purporting to 
act under this section: 
 ( a )  t h e  C r o w n ;  
 (b) a member or former memb er of the Executive Council; 
 (c) a board, trustee, Francophone regional authority, 
operator of a charter school or person responsible for the 
operation of a private school; 
 (d) any current or former employee of or individual 
currently or formerly engaged for services by 
 ( i )  t h e  C r o w n ,  
 (ii) a board, 
 (iii) a Francophone regional authority, 
 (iv) the operator of a charter school, or
 
 7 Explanatory Notes  
  
 8 
 (v) the person responsible for the operation of a private 
school. 
 
10   Section 53(2)(b) is amended by striking out “section 18 and 
any regulations under this Act” and substituting “sections 18 and 
18.1 and any regulations under this Act”. 
 
11   Section 58.1 is amended  
 (a) in subsection (1) by striking out  “or human sexuality”; 
 (b) in subsection (3) by striking out  “religion, religious 
themes or human sexuality” and substituting “religion or 
religious themes”. 
 
12   The following is added after section 58.1: 
Notice and consent re gender identity, sexual orientation 
or human sexuality instruction 
58.11(1)  A board shall, in accordance with the policies 
established under section 58.12, provide notice to, and seek the 
consent of, a parent of a student where courses, programs of 
study or instructional materials, or instruction or exercises, 
include subject-matter that deals primarily and explicitly with 
gender identity, sexual orientation or human sexuality. 
(2)  A board shall provide notice to the parent of a student at least 
30 days before the start of a course, program of study or 
instruction, or the first use of instructional materials or an 
exercise, referred to in subsection (1). 
(3)  No board or teacher shall permit a student to take part in a 
course, program of study or instruction, or use instructional 
materials or an exercise, referred to in subsection (1) unless the 
parent of the student has, before the start of the course, program 
 
 8 Explanatory Notes  
10   Section 53(2)(b) presently reads: 
(2)  A board may 
 (b) subject to section 18 and any  regulations under this Act, 
develop or acquire instructional materials for use in courses 
or programs or in schools, and 
11   Section 58.1 presently reads in part: 
58.1(1)  A board shall provide notice to a parent of a student where 
courses, programs of study or instructional materials, or instruction 
or exercises, include subject-matter that deals primarily and 
explicitly with religion or human sexuality. 
(3)  This section does not apply to incidental or indirect references 
to religion, religious themes or human sexuality in a course, 
program of study, instruction or exercises or in the use of 
instructional materials. 
12   Notice and consent re gender identity, sexual orientation or 
human sexuality instruction; parental notification and consent 
policies. 
  
 9 
of study or instruction, or before the first use of the instructional 
materials or exercise, provided consent for the student to do so in 
accordance with the policies established under section 58.12. 
(4)  Where no consent has been provided under this section in 
respect of a student, the teacher shall arrange for alternate 
instruction or supervision for the student outside the classroom or 
place where the course, program of study or instruction will take 
place or the instructional materials or exercise will be used. 
(5)  This section does not apply to incidental or indirect 
references to gender identity, sexual orientation or human 
sexuality in a course, program of study, instruction or exercises 
or in the use of instructional materials. 
(6)  Nothing in this section shall be construed so as to require the 
provision of notice to, or the seeking of consent of, the parent of a 
student for any participation by the student in a student 
organization established, or activity held, under section 35.1. 
Parental notification and consent policies 
58.12(1)  A board shall establish and implement policies 
respecting the provision of notice to, and the seeking of consent 
of, a parent of a student under section 58.11. 
(2)  The policies established under subsection (1) must 
 (a) address the following matters: 
 (i) the form and manner of the provision of notice under 
section 58.11(2); 
 (ii) the frequency and timing of the provision of notice 
under section 58.11(2); 
 (iii) the form and manner of t he seeking of consent under 
section 58.11(3), which must  
 (A) include sufficient detail to enable the parent of a 
student to make an informed decision under 
section 58.11(3), and 
 (B) provide the parent of a student with the option to 
consent to the student 
 
 9 Explanatory Notes  
  
 10 
 (I) taking part in all or  part of a course or 
program of study or instruction, or 
 (II) using all or part of instructional materials or 
an exercise 
  referred to in section 58.11; 
 (iv) any matters specified  by the Minister under 
subsection (3), 
  a n d  
 (b) be made publicly available. 
(3)  The Minister may specify other matters that must be 
addressed in the policies established under subsection (1). 
 
13   
Section 58.2(1) is amended by striking out “section 58 or 
58.1” and substituting “section 58, 58.1 or 58.11”. 
 
14   This Act comes into force on Proclamation. 
 
 
 
 10 Explanatory Notes  
13   Section 58.2(1) presently reads: 
58.2(1)  If a board, teacher or other person fails to comply with 
section 58 or 58.1, that failure to comply is deemed to be a decision 
that may be appealed in accordance with section 42. 
14   Coming into force. 


RECORD OF DEBATE 
Stage Date Member From To 
Interventions From To 
Stage Date Member From To 
Interventions From To 
Stage Date Member From To 
Interventions From To 
Stage Date Member From To 
Interventions From To 
Stage Date Member From To 
Interventions From To 
Stage Date Member From To 
Interventions From To 
Title: 2024 (31st, 1st) Bill 27, Education Amendment Act, 2024 