on Act is amended by this section.  
(2)  Section 1(1)(f) is amended 
 (a) by repealing subclause (iii) and substituting the 
following: 
 (iii) a provincial health corporation as defined in the 
Provincial Health Agencies Act; 
 (b) by adding the following after subclause (xii.1):   
 (xii.2) the Department of Seniors, Community and Social 
Services;  
 (c) by adding the following  after subclause (xiii.1): 
 (xiii.2) the Minister of Seniors, Community and Social Service s; 
Health Professions Act  
Amends RSA 2000 cH-7 
9(1)  The Health Professions Act is amended by this section.  
(2)  Section 1 is amended  
 (a) in subsection (1) 
 (i) by adding the follo wing after clause (o): 
 (o.1) “gender dysphoria” means a person’s distress caused 
by a marked incongruence between that person’s 
gender identity or gender expression and that 
person’s sex assigned at birth; 
 (o.2) “gender incongrue nce” means a marked and 
persistent incongruence between a person’s gender 
identity and that person’s sex assigned at birth; 
 (ii) by adding the following after clause (v): 
 4 Explanatory Notes 
Health Information Act 
8(1)   Amends chapter H-5 of the Revised Statutes of Alberta 2000. 
(2)   Section 1(1)(f) presently reads in part: 
1(1)  In this Act, 
 (f) “custodian” means 
 (iii) a provincial health board established pursuant to 
regulations made under section 17(1)(a) of the Provincial 
Health Agenc
[...]
he 
purposes of hormone therapy, including puberty suppression and 
hormone replacement therapy, for the treatment of gender 
dysphoria or gender incongruence except in accordance with an 
order of the Minister under section 1.93. 
(2)  The Minister may make regulations identifying any drug as a 
drug for the purposes of this section. 
Orders 
1.93   The Minister may make orders 
 (a) authorizing the prescription of a Schedule 1 drug within 
the meaning of the Pharmacy and Drug Act, or any other 
drug identified in the regulations made under section 
1.92(2), to a minor for the purposes of hormone therapy, 
including puberty suppression and hormone replacement 
therapy, for the treatment of gender dysphoria or gender 
incongruence, and  
 (b) respecting any such authorization, including any terms, 
conditions or limits that apply to an authorization. 
(4)  
Section 1.11 is renumbered as section 1.94. 
Health Quality Council of Alberta Act 
Amends SA 2011 cH-7.2 
10(1)  The Health Quality Council of Alberta Act is amended by 
this section. 
(2)  Section 1(c) is amended by striking out “provincial health 
board” and substituting “provincial health corporation”. 
(3)  Section 16(1)(a) and (b) are amended by striking out 
“community health council or subsidiary health corporation” and 
 6 Explanatory Notes 
(4)   Renumbers section. 
Health Quality Council of Alberta Act 
10(1)   Amends chapter H-7.2 of the Statutes of Alberta, 2011. 
(2)   Section 1(c) presently reads: 
1   In this Act, 
 (c) “health authority” means a provincial health agency, 
regional health authority or provincial health board under 
the Provincial Health Agencies Act; 
(3)   Section 16(1)(a) and (b) presently read: 
  
 7 
substituting “provincial health corporation, subsidiary health 
corporation or community health council”. 
Hospitals Act 
Amends RSA 2000 cH-12 
11(1)  The Hospitals Act is amended by this section. 
(2)  Section 48(a) is amended by striking out “provincial health 
board” and substituting “provincial health corporation”. 
Human Tissue and Organ Donation Act 
Amends SA 2006 cH-14.5 
12(1)  The Human Tissue and Organ Donation Act is amended 
by this section. 
(2)  Sections 12.1(2) and (3) and 12.6(4)(b) are amended by 
adding “provincial health agency or” before “regional health 
authority” wherever it occurs. 
 7 Explanatory Notes 
16(1)  For the purposes of carrying out activities under sections 
3(2)(a) to (c) and 15, the board may authorize a person to 
 (a) enter and inspect any place under the jurisdiction of a 
provincial health agency, regional health authority, 
community health council or subsidiary health corporation 
under the Provincial Health Agencies Act, and 
 (b) require the production for ex amination of any documents or 
records in the possession of the provincial health agency, 
regional health authority, community health council or 
subsidiary health corporation under the Provincial Health 
Agencies Act, and make copies of them or temporarily 
remove them for the purpose of making copies. 
Hospitals Act 
11(1)   Amends chapter H-12 of the Revised Statutes of Alberta 
2000. 
(2)   Section 48(a) presently reads: 
48   In this Part, 
 (a) “board” means the corporate body or person that owns or 
operates a hospital, but does not include a provincial health 
agency, regional health authority or provincial health board 
under the Provincial Health Agencies Act; 
Human Tissue and Organ Donation Act 
12(1)   Amends chapter H-14.5 of the Statutes of Alberta, 2006. 
(2)   Sections 12.1 and 12.6 presently read in part: 
12.1(2)  Subject to subsection (3), a regional health authority under 
the Provincial Health Agencies Act may carry out activities on 
behalf of the Agency. 
(3)  During any period in which a regional health authority is 
carrying out activities on behalf of the Agency under subsection (2), 
  
 8 
Labour Relations Code 
Amends RSA 2000 cL-1 
13(1)  The Labour Relations Code is amended by this section. 
(2)  Section 1(1) is amended by adding the following after 
clause (t.1): 
(t.11) “provincial health corpora tion” means a provincial health 
corporation under the Prov