Al-Guneid 
Armstrong-Homeniuk 
Calahoo Stonehouse 
Dyck 
Eggen 
Hunter 
McDougall 
Sinclair 
 
 
 
  
    
 
=====PAGE
December 3, 2024 Alberta Hansard 2287 
Legislative Assembly of Alberta 
Title: Tuesday, December 3, 2024 1:30 p.m. 
1:30 p.m. Tuesday, December 3, 2024 
[The Speaker in the chair] 
head: Prayers 
The Speaker: Lord, the God of righteousness and truth, grant to 
our King and to his government, to Members of the Legislative 
Assembly, and to all in positions of responsibility the guidance of 
Your spirit. May they never lead the province wrongly through love 
of power, desire to please, or unworthy ideas but, laying aside all 
private interests and prejudices, keep in mind their responsibility to 
seek to improve the condition of all. Amen. 
 Please be seated. 
head: Introduction of Visitors 
The Speaker: Hon. members, it is a great privilege and honour to 
introduce to you a visitor joining us in the Speaker’s gallery this 
afternoon, Her Excellency the ambassador of Germany, Ambassador 
Bellmann, who was recently appointed to Canada to her position in 
September. Prior to her appointment Her Excellency was the assistant 
deputy minister to the German foreign office in Berlin, where she was 
responsible for multiple files, including Canada, the United States, 
and the United Kingdom. 
 Earlier today I had the pleasure of meeting wi th Her Excellency 
and discussing how Alberta can continue to support the largest 
economy in the European Union, particularly in areas of technology, 
energy, manufacturing, and agriculture. Her Excellency is joined in 
the Speaker’s gallery by Ruth Schwab, t he honorary consul of 
Germany in Edmonton. I ask that they please rise and receive the 
warm welcome of the Assembly. 
head: Introduction of Guests 
The Speaker: The hon. Member for Edmonton -South West  or 
perhaps someone on his behalf. The hon. Member for Edmonton-
South. 
Member Hoyle: Yeah. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On behalf of my 
colleague the Member for Edmonton-South West I would like to 
introduce grade 6 students from the Kim Hung school. Please rise 
and receive the warm welcome of the Assembly. 
The Speaker: The hon. Member for Edmonton-Whitemud. 
Ms Pancholi: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On behalf of my fabulous 
colleague the Member for Edmonton -Highlands-Norwood I’m so 
pleased to welcome students from St. Leo school and their teacher. 
Please rise and receive the warm welcome of the Assembly. 
The Speaker: The hon. Member for St. Albert. 
Ms Renaud: Thanks, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure to introduce to you 
and through you some amazing advocates who are here to advocate for 
Barrier-Free Alberta. I ask them to please rise if they’re able: Michelle 
Kristinson, Alison Stutz, and Stella Varvis. Please welcome them. 
The Speaker: The Leader o
head: Government Bills and Orders 
 Third Reading 
 Bill 26  
 Health Statutes Amendment Act, 2024 (No. 2) 
The Speaker: The hon. Minister of Health has the call. 
Member LaGrange: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased to rise 
and move third reading of Bill 26, the Health Statutes Amendment 
Act, 2024 (No. 2). 
 The Health Statutes Amendment Act, 2024 (No. 2), would preserve 
choice for minors, support continued efforts to refocus the health care 
system, and protect the rights of Albertans. Through the act we would 
amend several existing pieces of legislation, including the Provincial 
Health Agencies Act, the Public Health Act, the Health Information 
Act, and the Health Professions Act. Our province is growing, and 
this bill responds to the changing needs of Albertans. For too long 
Albertans have faced a health care system that is overburdened, hard 
to navigate, and slow to address their needs. That’s why our 
government has been working to refocus the health care system. We 
recognize that long wait times in overwhelmed emergency rooms are 
unacceptable. Our vision for the future of health care is that the 
province is rooted in accountability and includes four provincial 
health agencies working together to ensure Albertans have access to 
the care they need when and where they need it. 
 The proposed amendments to the Provincial Health Agencies Act 
would enable our refocusing work to continue. The amendments 
would allow Alberta Health Services  to transition from a regional 
health authority to a provincial health corporation accountable to 
the new acute care provincial health agency, acute care Alberta. 
[The Deputy Speaker in the chair] 
 These changes would ensure that Alberta Health Services  can 
focus on providing the best quality care to patients in hospitals and 
emergency rooms while giving front-line experts the supports they 
need to care for Albertans. Bill 26 represents the next step in 
ensuring that we build a system that works for Albe rtans without 
disrupting the services they rely on. 
 Through the Health Statutes Amendment Act, 2024 (No. 2) , we 
are also seeking to implement several recommendations from the 
Public Health Emergencies Governance Review Panel, which was 
tasked with reviewing the legislation that guided Alberta’s response 
to the COVID-19 pandemic. Albertans know that our government is 
committed to safeguarding individuals’ rights. However, we 
recognize that there are times when public health measures must be 
taken to keep our communities safe. 
 Introducing a preamble to the Public Health Act  and clarifying 
what constitutes a public health emergency would ensure the rights 
of Albertans are protected and that public health measures are only 
taken when needed. Similarly, including an amended definition of a 
public health emergency would ensure we find the right balance and 
respond appropriately to situations that may arise in the future. These 
amendments address recommendation 3.2 and recommendation 7.4 
from the panel’s report. 
 Bill 26 also includes a proposed administrative amendment to the 
Health Information Act that would designate the Ministry of Seniors, 
Community and Social Services as a custodian, enabling that ministry 
to better support Albertans and improve health services planning and 
delivery. The amendment would also support the transition of 
continuing care to the Ministry of Seniors, Community and Social 
Services. 
 Finally, amendments to the Health Profess
l Yaseen 
Jean Sawhney 
Against the motion: 
Al-Guneid Elmeligi Loyola 
Arcand-Paul Eremenko  Metz 
Batten Ganley Notley 
Boparai Goehring Pancholi 
Brar Gray Renaud 
Calahoo Stonehouse Haji Sabir 
Ceci Hayter Schmidt 
Chapman Hoffman Shepherd 
Dach Hoyle Sigurdson, L. 
Deol Irwin Sweet 
Eggen Kasawski Wright, P. 
Ellingson Kayande 
Totals: For – 47 Against – 35 
[Motion carried; Bill 26 read a third time] 
The Speaker: In 30 seconds or less we will call the hon. Minister 
of Education. 
3:50  Bill 27  
 Education Amendment Act, 2024 
The Speaker: The hon. Minister of Education has the call. 
Mr. Nicolaides: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure to rise 
today to move third reading of Bill 27, the Education Amendment 
Act, 2024. 
 Of course, as members note, the act addresses a few key pieces, 
so I want to touch on a few of those elements. I think some members 
in debate have gotten a little lost about what the bill is actually about 
and what it’s seeking to do, so I’ll cover those very briefly. I’d like 
to take the opportunity as well just to address some of the 
comments, questions, and concerns that I’ve heard about different 
aspects of the bill throughout the course of debate that we’ve been 
having on the bill over the past few weeks. 
 First and foremost, the bill will make a number of amendments that 
are implementing recommendations from the Public Health 
Emergencies Governance Review Panel. Quite a mouthful there. Of 
course, in response to the COVID-19 pandemic we commissioned the 
review panel to explore government’s response to the COVID -19 
pandemic. In their analysis the panel and its members explored how the 
education system responded to the COVID-19 pandemic and, naturally, 
made a number of recommendations for government’s consideration to 
strengthen learning and prevent disruptions to learning. 
 I think this is an aspect that all me mbers in the Assembly can 
agree on, which is that the COVID -19 pandemic caused some 
significant disruption to student learning. The lack of in -person 
learning, the dramatic shift to online learning, a