here. We basically put it in the middle of a question.  
 Okay. It has been moved by the Gove rnment 
House Leader , seconded by the membe r for 
Lac  du  Bonnet, that the debate be now adjourned. 
Agreed?  
Some Honourable Members: Agreed.  
Mr. Deputy Speaker: Agreed and so ordered. 
 The opposite House leader –Official Opposition 
House Leader.  
Ms. Nahanni Fontaine (Official Opposition House 
Leader): I request a vote.  
Mr. Deputy Speaker:  The Official Opposi tion 
House Leader, on a vote. [interjection]  
 The Official Opposition House Leader. 
Ms. Fontaine: A recorded vote, Deputy Speaker. 
Voice Vote 
Mr. Deputy Speaker: First we–okay. First we have 
to go is –all those in favour of the debate –of the 
adjourned, please say yea.  
Some Honourable Members: Yea.  
Mr. Deputy Speaker: All those opposed, please say 
nay. 
An Honourable Member: Nay.  
Mr. Deputy Speaker: In my opinion, the Yeas have 
it.  
Recorded Vote 
Ms. Fontaine : Sorry. I request a recorded vote, 
please. 
Mr. Deputy Speaker:  A recorded vote has been 
requested. Call in the members.  
 The one hour provided for ringing the division 
bells has expired. I am therefore directing the 
division bells to be turned off, and the House to 
proceed with the–to vote.  
 The question before the House is the motion to 
adjourn the debate for second reading of Bill 8. 
=====PAGE
December 5, 2017 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF MANITOBA 377 
 
Division 
A RECORDED VOTE was taken, the result being as 
follows: 
Yeas 
Bindle, Clarke, Cox, Cullen, Curry, 
Eichler,   Ewasko,   Fielding, Friesen, Goertzen, 
Graydon,   Guillemard, Helwer, Isleifson, Johnson, 
Johnston,  Lagassé, Lagimodiere, Martin, Mayer, 
Michaleski,   Micklefield, Morley -Lecomte, Nesbitt, 
Reyes, Schuler, Smith (Southdale), Smook , Squires, 
Stefanson, Teitsma, Wharton, Wishart, Wowchuk, 
Yakimoski. 
Nays 
Allum, Altemeyer, Fletcher, Fontaine, 
Gerrard,   Kinew, Klassen,  Lamoureux, Lathlin, 
Lindsey, Maloway, Marcelino (Logan), 
Marcelino   (Tyndall Park), Saran, Selinger, Smith 
(Point Douglas), Wiebe. 
Deputy Clerk (Mr. Rick Yarish):  Yeas 35, 
Nays 17.  
Mr. Deputy Speaker: I declare the motion carried.  
 The debate is now over. 
* * * 
Mr. Fletcher: I rise on a point of privilege.  
Mr. Deputy Speaker: Order. 
 The hour being 5 p.m., the House is now 
adjourned and stands adjourned until 1:30 p.m. 
