Community Living disABILITY Services or 
Home Care workers or other health -care 
workers, and refusing to address the chal -
lenges experienced by women, BIPOC and 
other marginalized groups to fully participate 
in a pandemic recovery; and  
(ff) failing to learn the lessons of the pandemic 
by fur ther cutting health -care funding, re -
fusing to release up- to-date data about the 
spread of COVID 19 and refusing to call for 
an independent investigation into the pro-
vincial government's pandemic response. 
* (16:40)  
 As a consequence, the provincial government has 
thereby lost the confi dence of this House and the 
people of Manitoba. 
 Is it the pleasure of the House to adopt the amend-
ment?  
Some Honourable Members: Yes.  
Some Honourable Members: No.  
Voice Vote 
Madam Speaker All those in favour of the 
amendment, please say yea. 
Some Honourable Members: Yea. 
Madam Speaker: All those opposed, please say nay. 
Some Honourable Members: Nay. 
Madam Speaker: In my opinion, the Nays have it. 
Recorded Vote 
Ms. Nahanni Fontaine (Official Opposition House 
Leader): A recorded vote, Madam Speaker.  
Madam Speaker:  A recorded vote having been 
called, call in the members.  
 The question before the House now is the 
proposed amendment moved by the honour able 
Leader of the Official Opposition (Mr. Kinew) to the 
proposed motion of the honour able Minister of 
Finance (Mr.  Friesen) that this House approves in 
general the budgetary policy of the government.  
Division 
A RECORDED VOTE was taken, the result being as 
follows: 
Yeas 
Altomare, Asagwara, Brar, Bushie, Fontai ne, 
Gerrard, Kinew, Lamont, Lamoureux, Lathlin, 
Lindsey, Maloway, Marcelino, Moses, Naylor, Sala, 
Sandhu, Smith (Point Douglas), Wasyliw, Wiebe. 
Nays 
Clarke, Cox, Cullen, Eichler, Ewasko, Friesen, 
Goertzen, Gordon, Guenter, Guillemard, Helwer, 
Isleifson, J ohnson, Johnston, Khan, Lagassé, 
Lagimodiere, Michaleski, Micklefield, Morley-Lecomte, 
Nesbitt, Pedersen, Piwniuk, Reyes, Schuler, Smith 
(Lagimodière), Smook, Squires, Stefanson, Teitsma, 
Wharton, Wishart. 
Clerk (Ms. Patricia Chaychuk): Yeas 20, Nays 32.  
Madam Speaker: The motion is accordingly lost. 
 The question before the House is the 'promosed' 
motion of the honour able Minister of Finance, that 
this House approves in general the budgetary policy 
for the government. 
 Is it the pleasure of the House to adopt the 
motion? Agreed?  
Some Honourable Members: Agreed. 
Some Honourable Members: No. 
Madam Speaker: I hear a no.  
Voice Vote 
Madam Speaker: All those in favour of the motion, 
please say yea. 
Some Honourable Members: Yea. 
Madam Speaker: All those opposed, please say nay. 
Some Honourable Members: Nay. 
Madam Speaker: In my opinion, the Yeas have it. 
Recorded Vote 
Hon. Kelvin Goertzen (Government House 
Leader): A recorded vote, Madam Speaker.  
Madam Speaker:  A recorded vote having been 
called, call in the members.  
=====PAGE
April 25, 2022 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF MANITOBA 1545 
 
 The question before the House is the proposed 
motion of the honour able Minister of Finance 
(Mr. Friesen), that this House approves in general the 
budgetary policy of the government. [interjection]  
 Order. Order, please. I'm going to ask for every-
body to remain silent. This is a difficult enough job 
for the pages, and it is something where we normally 
have an ex pectation that there be no heckling or 
sounds made while they are making this tre mendous 
effort to do this.  
 I will ask the page, then, to go ahead with the vote.  
Division 
A RECORDED VOTE was taken, the result being as 
follows: 
Yeas 
Clarke, Cox, Cullen, Eichler, Ewasko, Friesen, 
Goertzen, Gordon, Guenter, Guillemard, Helwer, 
Isleifson, Johnson, Johnston, Khan, Lagassé, 
Lagimodiere, Michaleski, Micklefield, Morley-Lecomte, 
Nesbitt, Pedersen, Piwniuk, Reyes, Schuler, Smith 
(Lagimodière), Smook, Squires, Stefanson, Teitsma, 
Wharton, Wishart. 
Nays 
Altomare, Asagwara, Brar, Bushie, Fontaine, 
Gerrard, Kinew, Lamont, Lamoureux, Lathlin, 
Lindsey, Maloway, Marcelino, Moses, Naylor, Sala, 
Sandhu, Smith (Point Douglas), Wasyliw, Wiebe. 
Clerk: Yeas 32, Nays 20. 
Madam Speaker: The motion is accordingly passed.  
* * * 
* (16:50)  
Mr. Goertzen:  Could you please call for secon d 
reading debate bills 17, 18, 19, 23, 29, followed by 
resuming second reading debate on Bill 26.  
Madam Speaker: As agreed to by the House earlier 
today, the House will be dealing with second reading 
can seem to be something which is very simple to do, 
but there have been a number of occasions where, 
when people looked back after a problem a rose, that 
they could see that there was a lead-up of mentions on 
social media before the event occurred. And I am sure 
that there is yet much to be learned in this area so that 
we can better predict what's happening and better 
understand and be ready for things which may happen.  
 So, Mr.  Deputy Speaker, I wanted to put those 
few comments on the record and look forward to 
further discussion as this goes to committee stage and 
moves on from there.  
Mr. Deputy Speaker: The question before the House 
is second reading of Bill 18, The Legislative Security 
Amendment Act.  
 Isn't it–is it the pleasure of the House to adopt the 
motion?  
Some Honourable Members: Agreed.  
Some Honourable Members: No.  
Voice Vote 
Mr. Deputy Speaker:  All those in favour, please 
say yea. 
Some Honourable Members: Yea. 
Mr. Deputy Speaker:  All those opposed, please 
say nay. 
Some Honourable Members: Nay. 
Mr. Deputy Speaker:  In my opinion, the Yeas 
have it.  
Recorded Vote 
Mr. Matt Wiebe ( Acting Opposition House 
Leader): A recorded vote.  
Mr. Deputy Speaker: A recorded vote being called, 
call in the members.  
Madam Speaker in the Chair  
* (18:50) 
Madam Speaker: The question before the House is 
second reading of Bill  18, The Legislative Security 
Amendment Act.  
Division 
A RECORDED VOTE was taken, the result being as 
follows: 
Yeas 
Cox, Cullen, Eichler, Ewasko, Gerrard, Goertzen, 
Gordon, Guenter, Guillemard, Helwer, Isleifson, 
Johnson, Johnston, Khan, Lagassé, Lagimodiere, 
Lamoureux, Michaleski, Micklefield, Morley-Lecomte, 
Nesbitt, Pedersen, Piwniuk, Reyes, Schuler , Smith 
(Lagimodière), Smook, Squires, Teitsma, Wharton, 
Wishart. 
Nays 
Altomare, Asagwara, Brar, Bushie, Fontaine, Kinew, 
Lathlin, Lindsey, Maloway, Marcelino, Moses, 
Naylor, Sala, Sandhu, Smith (Point  Douglas), 
Wasyliw, Wiebe. 
Clerk (Ms. Patricia Chaychuk): Yeas 31, Nays 17.  
Madam Speaker: I declare the motion accordingly 
passed. 
Bill 19–The Beneficiary Designation 
(Retirement, Savings and Other Plans) 
Amendment Act 
Madam Speaker:  We will now move to second 
