June 8 Journal of Assembly 1 
 
Daily sitting 43 Thursday, June 8, 2023 
10 o’clock a.m. 
Prayers. 
 
Following Statements by Ministers, Mr. Arseneau rose on a point of 
order and submitted that government announcements on policy and 
matters of public interest should be made in the House. 
Mr. Arseneault and Hon. Mr. G. Savoie spoke on the point of order. 
Mr. Speaker ruled the point well taken and advised that as a sign of 
respect for the institution, Ministers should deliver  important 
announcements in the House if it is sitting that day. 
 
Mr. Ames, from the Standing Committee on Economic Policy, 
presented t he Twelfth Report of the Committee for the session 
which was read and is as follows: 
 
June 8, 2023 
To The Honourable 
The Legislative Assembly of 
The Province of New Brunswick 
 
Mr. Speaker: 
 
Your Standing Committee on Economic Policy begs leave to submit this, 
their twelfth report. 
 
Your Committee met on June 6 and 7, 2023, and had under consideration: 
 
Bill 39, An Act Respecting the Regional Health Authorities; 
 
and have agreed to the same. 
 
Your Committee also had under consideration: 
 
Bill 37, An Act Respecting the Official Languages Act; 
 
and have made certain progress therein. 
 
And your Committee begs leave to make a further report. 
 
(Sgd.:)   Richard Ames, M.L.A. 
  Chair 
 
Pursuant to Standing Rule 78.1, Mr. Speaker put the question on the 
motion deemed to be before the House, that the report be concurred 
in, and it was resolved in the affirmative. 
 
 
=====PAGE
2 1-2 Charles III, 2022-2023 June 8 
 
The following Bill was introduced and read a first time: 
 
By Mr. C. Chiasson, 
Bill 60, An Act to Amend the Motor Vehicle Act. 
 
Hon. Mr. G. Savoie, Government House Leader, announced that it 
was the intention of government that the House recess until 2.30 p.m.; 
at which time Opposition Members’ Business would be considered. 
 
At 11.23 a.m. the House recessed. At 2.30 p.m. the House resumed. 
 
Debate resumed on the adjourned debate on the motion that Bill 56, 
An Act to End Oil and Natural Gas Exploration and Drilling , be 
now read a second time. 
 
At 3 p.m. the House recessed. At 3.09 p.m. the House resumed. 
 
And the debate being ended, and the question being put that Bill 56 
be now read a second time, it was resolved in the negative. 
 
Pursuant to Notice of Motion 36, Mr. D’Amours moved, on behalf 
of Mr. LePage, seconded by Ms. Landry: 
 
WHEREAS the COVID-19 pandemic brought home the reality that 
if we do not improve air quality systems in government buildings 
like schools, hospitals, and institutions, we increase the risk of the 
spread of airborne illnesses; 
 
WHEREAS air quality in these buildings must be improved for the 
safety and well-being of patients, healthcare workers, students, 
educators, employees, and all who enter these buildings; 
 
WHEREAS, while other Maritime Provinces like PEI and Nova 
Scotia are making strategic investments in systems that improve air 
quality and ventilation through programs like the federal COVID-19 
resilience fund, New Brunswick has not yet made these investments 
a priority; 
 
WHEREAS there are many regions of the province where air quality 
is diminished due to airborne pollutants, airborne contaminants, and 
other harmful agents; 
 
WHEREAS reducing pollutants and improving air quality and thus 
improving community and environmental health should be a priority 
of government; 
=====PAGE
June 8 Journal of Assembly 3 
 
BE IT THEREFORE RESOLVED that the Legislative Assembly 
urge the government to modernize New Brunswick’s air quality 
laws and standards with a goal of bringing forward a strengthened 
Clean Air Act and modernized regulations; 
 
BE IT FURTHER RESOLVED that the Legislative Assembly urge 
the government to bring forward a plan to monitor, report, and improve 
air quality systems in public buildings like hospitals, schools, and 
government buildings to mitigate the risks associated with the transfer of 
airborne illnesses, airborne contaminants, and other harmful agents. 
 
And the question being put, a debate ensued. 
 
And after some time, Hon. Mr. Carr, seconded by Mr. Turner, moved 
in amendment: 
 
AMENDMENT 
 
That Motion 36 be amended by deleting the third whereas clause. 
 
Mr. Speaker put the question on the proposed amendment and a 
debate ensued. 
 
At 4.05 p.m. the House recessed. At 4.18 p.m. the House resumed. 
 
And the debate being ended, and the question being put, the amendment 
was adopted. 
 
Mr. Speaker put the question on Motion 36 as amended as follows: 
 
WHEREAS the COVID-19 pandemic brought home the reality that 
if we do not improve air quality systems in government buildings 
like schools, hospitals, and institutions, we increase the risk of the 
spread of airborne illnesses; 
 
WHEREAS air quality in these buildings must be improved for the 
safety and well -being of patients, healthcare workers, students, 
educators, employees, and all who enter these buildings; 
 
WHEREAS there are many regions of the province where air quality 
is diminished due to airborne pollutants, airborne contaminants, and 
other harmful agents; 
 
=====PAGE
4 1-2 Charles III, 2022-2023 June 8 
 
WHEREAS reducing pollutants and improving air quality and thus 
improving community and environmental health should be a priority 
of government; 
 
BE IT THEREFORE RESOLVED that the Legislative Assembly 
urge the government to modernize New Brunswick’s air quality 
laws and standards with a goal of bringing forward a strengthened 
Clean Air Act and modernized regulations; 
 
BE IT FURTHER RESOLVED that the Legislative Assembly urge 
the government to bring forward a plan to monitor, report, and improve 
air quality systems in public buildings like hospitals, schools, and 
government buildings to mitigate the risks associated with the transfer of 
airborne illnesses, airborne contaminants, and other harmful agents. 
 
And the question being put, Motion 36 as amended was resolved in 
the affirmative on the following recorded division: 
 
YEAS - 44 
 
Hon. Mr. Holder Hon. Mr. Carr Mr. Gauvin 
Hon. Mr. G. Savoie Mr. Turner Mr. C. Chiasson 
Hon. Mr. Steeves Ms. S. Wilson Mr. Coon 
Hon. Ms. Shephard Ms. M. Wilson Ms. Mitton 
Hon. Mr. Flemming Mr. Cullins Mr. J. LeBlanc 
Hon. Mr. Fitch Mr. Wetmore Mr. K. Chiasson 
Hon. Mr. R. Savoie Mr. Ames Mr. D’Amours 
Hon. Ms. Scott-Wallace Mr. Dawson Mr. Bourque 
Hon. Ms. Green Ms. Bockus Mr. Mallet 
Hon. Ms. Dunn Ms. Conroy Mr. Arseneau 
Hon. Mr. Crossman Mr. Arseneault Mr. Losier 
Hon. Ms. Johnson Mr. Legacy Mr. M. LeBlanc 
Hon. Mr. Allain Ms. Holt Ms. Landry 
Hon. Mr. Hogan Mr. McKee Mr. Cardy 
Hon. Mr. Austin Ms. Thériault  
 
Pursuant to Notice of Motion 46, Mr. K. Chiasson moved, seconded 
by Mr. LePage: 
 
WHEREAS New Brunswick has the opportunity to be an 
environmental leader powered by affordable clean energy that will 
be sustainable for future generations; 
 
 
=====PAGE
June 8 Journal of Assembly 5 
 
WHEREAS New Brunswick must continue to reduce our carbon 
footprint to achieve net zero/carbon neutrality by adopting blue, 
green, and clean technologies, modernizing infrastructure,  and 
electrifying transportation; 
 
WHEREAS New Brunswick’s demand for clean, reliable, efficient, 
and affordable energy is currently straining resources and will 
continue to grow into the future; 
 
WHEREAS New Brunswick has a range of energy generating 
infrastructure at various stages of lifecycle; including the Mactaquac 
hydro facility, the NB Power Belledune Generating Station, and the 
Lepreau Nuclear Generating Station; 
 
WHEREAS the government of New Brunswick has shared plans to 
deliver a clean electricity strategy by 2025; 
 
WHEREAS the Standing Committee on Climate Change and 
Environmental Stewardship adopted on February 17, 2023, a motion 
to hold public hearings on a clean energy strategy, whose conclusions 
must be finalized by the committee by October 1, 2023; 
 
WHEREAS a comprehensive energy strategy in 2023 would 
provide a roadmap for optimizing energy production, promoting 
energy efficiency, and integrating renewable energy sources; 
 
WHEREAS there are current opportunities for New Brunswick to 
play a role in the clean energy economy; 
 
BE IT THEREFORE RESOLVED that the Legislative Assembly 
urge the government to expedite the development of a 
comprehensive energy strategy that recognizes the need for reliable 
baseline power and focuses on increased renew able energy sources 
encompassing the following key elements: 
 
a. a full inventory of current generating infrastructure including current 
production capacity and current and projected gaps in demand; 
b. the identification and evaluation of our region’s renewable energy 
potential, including wind, solar, hydro, biomass, and geothermal 
resources and other energy sources including nuclear; 
c. a commitment to stop further development of fossil fuels, 
including those from fracking and drilling; 
d. a plan for the electrificati on of New Brunswick, including the 
development of a smart grid that will allow for and incentivize 
the adoption of community-level power production; 
=====PAGE
6 1-2 Charles III, 2022-2023 June 8 
 
e. the fostering of partnerships with Indigenous communities, local 
stakeholders, and industry experts to ensure inclusivity and 
maximize collaboration; 
f. a plan to increase public awareness, engagement, and education 
through targeted communication campaigns and community 
outreach programs; 
g. a review and update of existing energy-related legislation to align 
with the goals of the comprehensive strategy in order to attract 
private investment in clean energy projects and take advantage of 
economic opportunities related to clean energy and to ensure the 
monitoring and evaluation of the progress of the strategy. 
 
And the question being put, Mr. Speaker interrupted proceedings 
and announced that the hour of daily adjournment had arrived. 
 
And then, 6 p.m., the House adjourned. 
 
The following document, having been deposited with the Clerk of 
the House, was deemed laid upon the table of the House pursuant to 
Standing Rule 39: 
 
Response to Petition 13 June 7, 2023 