236 60-61 Elizabeth II, 2011-2012 June 8
Daily sitting 52 Friday, June 8, 2012
9 o’clock a.m.
Prayers.
The following Bill was introduced and read a first time:
By Hon. Mr. P. Robichaud,
Bill 69, An Act to Amend the Electoral Boundaries and Representation
Act.
It was agreed by unanimous consent that Bill 69 be ordered for second
and third reading forthwith and that the Bill be deemed to have received
Committee of the Whole consideration.
The following Bill was read a second time:
Bill 69, An Act to Amend the Electoral Boundaries and Representation
Act.
The following Bill was read a third time:
Bill 69, An Act to Amend the Electoral Boundaries and Representation
Act.
Ordered that the said Bill does pass.
Hon. Mr. P. Robichaud, Government House Leader, announced that it
was the intention of government that the House resolve itself into a
Committee of the Whole to consider Bills 61, 66, 67 and 68.
The House resolved itself into a Committee of the Whole with Mr.
Urquhart in the chair.
At 12.32 o'clock p.m., Mr. Urquhart declared a recess and left the chair.
12.57 o'clock p.m.
The Committee resumed.
And after some time, Mr. C. Landry took the chair.
And after some further time, Mr. Speaker resumed the chair, and Mr. C.
Landry, the Chair, after requesting that Mr. Speaker revert to
Presentations of Committee Reports, reported:
=====PAGE
June 8 Journal of Assembly 237
That the Committee had directed that he report the following Bills as
agreed to:
Bill 66, An Act to Amend the Executive Council Act.
Bill 67, An Act to Amend the Gasoline and Motive Fuel Tax Act.
And that the Committee had directed that he report the following Bill as
amended:
Bill 61, Regional Service Delivery Act.
And the Committee asked leave to make a further report.
Pursuant to Standing Rule 78.1, Mr. Speaker put the question on the
motion deemed to be before the House, that the report be concurred in,
and it was resolved in the affirmative.
On motion of Hon. Mr. P. Robichaud, seconded by Mr. Fraser:
RESOLVED, that, with the unanimous consent of the House,
all government Bills remaining before the Committee of the Whole at the
time of adjournment on Tuesday, June 12, 2012, shall be deemed to have
been considered in Committee of the Whole House, agreed to and
reported thereon,
the House shall sit at 9:00 a.m. on Wednesday, June 13, 2012,
following routine business on Wednesday, June 13, 2012, the House shall
consider Bill 62, An Act to Amend the Municipalities Act, as Opposition
Members’ Business for the period of time remaining in the 2 hour time
limit allocated for the consideration of the Bill,
and following the vote at second reading of Bill 62, the House shall
proceed with Third Reading of Government Bills followed by Royal
Assent.
On motion of Hon. Mr. P. Robichaud, seconded by the Honourable the
Premier:
RESOLVED, THAT, when the Assembly adjourns on Wednesday, June
13, 2012, it stand adjourned until Tuesday, November 27, 2012, at 11
o'clock a.m., provided always that if it appears to the satisfaction of Mr.
Speaker, after consultation with the Government, that the public interest
=====PAGE
238 60-61 Elizabeth II, 2011-2012 June 8
requires that the House should meet at an earlier time during the
adjournment, Mr. Speaker may give notice that he is so satisfied and in
such notice shall state a time at which the House shall meet, and
thereupon the House shall meet at the time so stated and shall transact
its business as if it has been duly adjourned to that time, and
THAT in the event of Mr. Speaker being unable to act owing to illness
or other cause, either of the Deputy Speakers shall act in his stead for
the purpose of this order.
And then, 1.55 o'clock p.m., the House adjourned.
