and a debate ensued. 
 
At 2.38 p.m. the House recessed. At 2.45 p.m. the House resumed. 
 
And after some time. Mr. M. LeBlanc rose on a point of order and 
submitted that the sub -amendment was out of order  as it was 
completely contrary to the amendment and would produce the 
same result as the defeat of the amendment . Ms. M. Johnson spoke 
on the point of order. Mr.  Deputy Speaker ruled the point not well 
taken as the matter had already been decided. 
 
And the debate being ended, and the question being put, the sub -
amendment was defeated on the following recorded division: 
 
YEAS - 17 
 
Mr. Hogan Mr. Ames Ms. S. Wilson 
Ms. M. Johnson Ms. M. Wilson Mr. Cullins 
Mr. Savoie Mr. Weir Ms. Bockus 
Ms. Scott-Wallace Ms. Conroy Mr. Lee 
Mr. Austin Mr. Oliver Ms. Mitton 
Mr. Monahan Mr. Russel  
 
NAYS - 24 
 
Mr. M. LeBlanc Hon. Mr. K. Chiasson Mr. Mallet 
Hon. Ms. Holt Hon. Mr. Finnigan Mr. Bourque 
Hon. Ms. C. Johnson Hon. Mr. Herron Mr. J. LeBlanc 
Hon. Mr. Dornan Hon. Mr. Hickey Mr. Doucet 
Hon. Ms. Miles Hon. Mr. Randall Ms. Vautour 
Hon. Mr. McKee Hon. Mr. Kennedy Ms. Sodhi 
Hon. Ms. Thériault Hon. Ms. Townsend Mr. Johnston 
Hon. Ms. Boudreau Ms. Wilcott Mr. Robichaud 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker put the question on the amendment and it was 
adopted. 
 
 
=====PAGE
4 4-5 Charles III, 2025-2026 November 20 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker put the question on Motion 4 as amended as 
follows: 
 
WHEREAS persons suffering from substance use disorders remain 
at high risk for relapse, even after receiving treatment for addiction; 
 
WHEREAS receiving follow -up supports and lifestyle changes 
leads to improved outcomes and lower relapse rates after treatment; 
 
WHEREAS stable housing, employment, and mental health support 
for addiction and co -occurring disorders are critical to maintaining 
sobriety; 
 
WHEREAS the lack of gender -specific, age -appropriate, and 
culturally-safe services for all marginalized groups  has been 
identified as a barrier to recovery; 
 
WHEREAS careful and rigorous case management is critical to 
ensuring individuals in recovery are receiving the supports they 

need to maintain sobriety; 
 
BE IT THEREFORE RESOLVED that the Legislative Assembly 
urge the government  to continue  to provide persons in recovery 
from substance use disorders with integrated care plans comprising 
mental health support, employment opportunities, assistance finding 
affordable housing, access to recovery-focused support groups, and 
access to social services that meet the needs of marginalized groups. 
 
And the question being put, Motion 4 as amended was resolved in 
the affirmative on the following recorded division after leave was 
granted to dispense with the ten -minute time allotted for the 
ringing of the bells: 
 
YEAS - 26 
 
Mr. M. LeBlanc Hon. Mr. Finnigan Mr. J. LeBlanc 
Hon. Ms. Holt Hon. Mr. Herron Mr. Doucet 
Hon. Ms. C. Johnson Hon. Mr. Hickey Ms. Vautour 
Hon. Mr. Dornan Hon. Mr. Randall Ms. Sodhi 
Hon. Ms. Miles Hon. Mr. Kennedy Mr. Johnston 
Hon. Mr. McKee Hon. Ms. Townsend Mr. Robichaud 
Hon. Ms. Thériault Ms. Wilcott Mr. Coon 
Hon. Ms. Boudreau Mr. Mallet Ms. Mitton 
Hon. Mr. K. Chiasson Mr. Bourque  
 
=====PAGE
November 20 Journal of Assembly 5 
 
NAYS - 16 
 
Mr. Hogan Mr. Ames Ms. S. Wilson 
Ms. M. Johnson Ms. M. Wilson Mr. Cullins 
Mr. Savoie Mr. Weir Ms. Bockus 
Ms. Scott-Wallace Ms. Conroy Mr. Lee 
Mr. Austin Mr. Oliver  
Mr. Monahan Mr. Russel  
 
Mr. Bourque, the Deputy Speaker, took the chair as Acting Speaker. 
 
Pursuant to Notice of Motion 3, Mr. Weir moved, seconded by 
Mr. Hogan: 
 
WHEREAS emergency services and hospital emergency departments 
are seeing increasing mental health demand; 
 
WHEREAS police are frequently first responders to mental -health 
crises — studies report that 6% to as high as 30% of police calls 
involve persons believed to be experiencing a mental -health 
problem — and this variability underscores the need for consistent, 
evidence-based crisis response training across front-line services; 
 
WHEREAS New  Brunswick’s mental health indicators are of 
particular concern: provincial reports and the Canadian Mental 
Health Association note higher -than-average rates of mood, 
anxiety and substance-use disorders in New Brunswick; 
 
WHEREAS evidence reviews of crisis -response and de -escalation 
approaches indicate that training in trauma -informed care, mental 
health crisis intervention and de -escalation for police, EMS, 
emergency-room staff and social workers improves safety, reduces 
coercive responses, and connects people more effectively to care; 
 
BE IT THEREFORE RESOLVED that the Legislative Assembly 
urge the government to institute mandatory training for police, 
EMS, ER staff, and social workers in mental health crisis response 
and trauma-informed care be implemented. 
 
And the question being put, a debate ensued. 
 
And after some time, Hon. Mr. McKee, seconded by Mr. Robichaud, 
moved in amendment: 
 
 
=====PAGE
6 4-5 Charles III, 2025-2026 November 20 
 
AMENDMENT 
 
That Motion 3 be amended in the resolution clause by striking out 
all the words after “ to” and substituting “continue to provide 
access to training for police, EMS, ER staff and social workers in 
mental health crisis response and trauma-informed care.” 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker put the question on the proposed amendment 
and a debate ensued. 
 
At 3.55 p.m. the House recessed. At 4.08 p.m. the House resumed. 
 
And after some time, Mr. Hogan, seconded by Mr. Ames, moved a 
sub-amendment: 
 
SUB-AMENDMENT 
 
That the amendment to Motion 3 be amended by adding “by 
augmenting current programs with increased financial support” 
after “care”. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker put the question on the proposed sub-amendment 
and a debate ensued. 
 
At 4.24 p.m. the House recessed. At 4.37 p.m. the House resumed. 
 
Mr. M. LeBlanc rose on a point of order and submitted that the 
sub-amendment was out of order as it required the expenditure of 
funds. Mr.  Deputy Speaker ruled the point not well taken as the  
original motion simply urges, not directs, the government to take a 
certain action. 
 
And the debate being ended, and the question being put, the sub -
amendment was defeated. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker put the question on the amendment and it was 
adopted. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker put the question on Motion 3 as amended as 
follows: 
 
WHEREAS emergency services and hospital emergency departments 
are seeing increasing mental health demand; 
 
=====PAGE
November 20 Journal of Assembly 7 
 
WHEREAS police are frequently first responders to mental -health 
crises — studies report that 6% to as high as 30% of police calls 
involve persons believed to be experiencing a mental -health 
problem — and this variability underscores the need for consistent, 
evidence-based crisis response training across front-line services; 
 
WHEREAS New  Brunswick’s mental health indicators are of 
particular concern: provincial reports and the Canadian Mental 
Health Association note higher -than-average rates of mood, 
anxiety and substance-use disorders in New Brunswick; 
 

WHEREAS evidence reviews of crisis -response and de -escalation 
approaches indicate that training in trauma -informed care, mental 
health crisis intervention and de -escalation for police, EMS, 
emergency-room staff and social workers improves safety, reduces 
coercive responses, and connects people more effectively to care; 
 
BE IT THEREFORE RESOLVED that the Legislative Assembly 
urge the government to continue to provide access to training for 
police, EMS, ER staff, and social workers in mental health crisis 
response and trauma-informed care. 
 
And the question being put, Motion 3 as amended was resolved in 
the affirmative on the following recorded division: 
 
YEAS - 23 
 
Mr. M. LeBlanc Hon. Ms. Boudreau Mr. Mallet 
Hon. Ms. Holt Hon. Mr. K. Chiasson Mr. Arseneault 
Hon. Ms. C. Johnson Hon. Mr. Finnigan Mr. J. LeBlanc 
Hon. Mr. Dornan Hon. Mr. Herron Ms. Vautour 
Hon. Ms. Miles Hon. Mr. Hickey Ms. Sodhi 
Hon. Mr. LePage Hon. Mr. Randall Mr. Johnston 
Hon. Mr. McKee Hon. Ms. Townsend Mr. Robichaud 
Hon. Ms. Thériault Ms. Wilcott  
 
NAYS - 17 
 
Mr. Hogan Ms. M. Wilson Ms. S. Wilson 
Ms. M. Johnson Mr. Coon Mr. Cullins 
Mr. Savoie Mr. Weir Ms. Bockus 
Mr. Austin Ms. Conroy Mr. Lee 
Mr. Monahan Mr. Oliver Ms. Mitton 
Mr. Ames Mr. Russell  
 
=====PAGE
8 4-5 Charles III, 2025-2026 November 20 
 
Pursuant to Notice of Motion 1, Mr. Ames moved, seconded by 
Mr. Hogan: 
 
WHEREAS drug addiction and recovery are critical public health 
and public safety issues that deeply impact individuals, families, 
small businesses and communities across New Brunswick; 
 
WHEREAS the last report from Correctional Service Canada from 
2019 estimated that 78% of offenders in correctional institutions 
struggled with substance use; 
 
WHEREAS the chief of the Saint John police has attributed the 8% 
increase in violent crime in Saint John to illicit drugs; 
 
WHEREAS therapeutic community models / therapeutic living 
units have been successfully implemented in correctional settings 
in North America and Europe, and have consistently demonstrated 

