........................................................................................................... 4365 
=====PAGE

=====PAGE
 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 4351 
 October 20, 2023 
 
[The Assembly met at 09:00.] 
 
[Prayers] 
 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 
WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Deputy Whip. 
 
Ms. Lambert: — I wish to order questions 156 to 161. 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Pursuant to the sessional order, debate 
on third readings and any amendment shall not exceed two hours. 
The time will be displayed on the Chamber clock. 
 
GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 
THIRD READINGS 
 
Bill No. 137 — The Education (Parents’ Bill of Rights) 
Amendment Act, 2023/Loi modificative de 2023 sur 
l’éducation (Déclaration des droits des parents) 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cockrill: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that Bill 
137, The Education (Parents’ Bill of Rights) Amendment Act, 
2023 now be read a third time and passed under its title. 
 
The Speaker : — It has been moved that Bill No. 137, The 
Education (Parents’ Bill of Rights) Amendment Act, 2023 be now 
read the third time and passed under its title. Is t he Assembly 
ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker : — All in favour? I recognize the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Ms. Beck: — Mr. Speaker, it gives me no pleasure to rise and 
enter this debate on Bill 137. The fact that we’re he re today 
debating this piece of legislation instead of the real priorities of 
the people of Saskatchewan, it’s the clearest sign yet of how out 
of touch and tired this government has become. 
 
Instead of working to provide the solutions that Saskatchewan 
people need on health care, on the cost of living, and on the very 
real concerns in our education system, instead of focusing on the 
real issues that keep families up at night in our province, this 
government is using their majority to ram through a bill who se 
only purpose is to sow division and strip vulnerable kids of their 
rights. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s undemocratic and it’s shameful. It is beyond 
disappointing to see this government using vulnerable kids to 
play wedge politics and to try to score political po ints. It’s 
beyond disappointing. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, the reaction that we’ve seen from 
Saskatchewan people, that is what gives me hope. It gives me 
hope because we’ve seen so many people from all walks of life 
stand up and say what this government is doing is wrong. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I am so incredibly proud of this team who has 
brought those concerns and those cautions to the floor of this 
Assembly to be heard, even if that tired and out -of-touch 
government isn’t interested in hearing what they have to say. Mr. 
Speaker, we’ve seen so many people, so many amazing people, 
speaking out about this bill — faith leaders, teachers, and school 
divisions, students, the Children’s Advocate, and the Human 
Rights Commission, workers, First Nation and Métis leader s, 
lawyers, and the courts. And most of all, we’ve heard from 
parents. So many across this province, Mr. Speaker, are stepping 
up to say no to this Premier’s attempt to divide us. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, to all of them, I say thank you. Thank you for 
using your voice and for speaking out against this government’s 
attempt to sow even further division. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s taken so much work from all of us inside and 
outside this Assembly to get to the point where we’re at today. 
We tried to fix the problems in this bill. Last night my colleague 
put forward amendments, one that would have created a real 
parental engagement strategy where the government would work 
with parents, work with school divisions, and community 
councils as true partners. But of course, Mr. Spe aker, that 
government voted that amendment down. 
 
And we also put forward an amendment to try to fix what is most 
broken about this bill, the part that puts children, vulnerable 
children, at risk of irreparable harm. Our do-no-harm amendment 
would have mad e an exemption for cases where there’s just no 
way to get parental consent without putting vulnerable kids at 
risk, something that that minister dismissed last night in 
committee as hypothetical. It’s not a hypothetical question, Mr. 
Speaker. It’s very rea l. It’s a life -and-death reality for a very 
small and very vulnerable group of kids in this province. 
 
This government showed through their votes last night that in a 
small minority of cases, teachers will have to choose between 
shoving kids back in the cl oset or putting them in harm’s way. 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan people know that that  simply is not 
right. And when all is said and done, this government with their 
big majority, well they’re going to do what they wish. But, Mr. 
Speaker, to the people of Saskatchewan I say this, our fight does 
not end here today. In fact, Mr. Speaker, it’s only begun. 
 
Yesterday that Premier made it very clear he has no intention of 
changing course. He’s not going to listen to all of the voices who 
have spoken out about this bill. He’s not going to keep from 
moving forward, ramming forward with this bill, a bill that sows 
division and that puts vulnerable kids at risk. Mr. Speaker, at the 
end of the day, I guess that’s his choice to make. And that’s a 
choice that every member on that government side is going to 
have to make. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan will also have a 
choice to make about this time next year. They’re going to choose 
between this team, this team that has put in the work, that is 
listening, tha t is standing up for human rights, a team that is 
focused on the things that matter to Saskatchewan people, a team 
that knows that this is a province where we are better served, we 
are stronger together. 
=====PAGE
4352 Saskatchewan Hansard October 20, 2023 
On the other side they’re going to continue to see a government 
that is tired and out of touch, that are only listening to themselves, 
and that they have shown themselves to be willing to use 
children, vulnerable children as political pawns, a government 
that plays on people’s fears and acti